# ETL Sparkify

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

Here is an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.


## Files

There are two datasets for this project: song and log datasets that reside in S3. 

Here are the S3 links for each:

    Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
    Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like:

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like:

```
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.143 Safari/537.36\"","userId":"39"}
```

## Start schema

### Fact Table

    songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
        songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

    users - users in the app
        user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
    songs - songs in music database
        song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
    artists - artists in music database
        artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
    time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
        start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Running the ETL pipeline

1.  Run `etl.py` to start the ETL data pipeline:
    - Process song data files from S3 to S3 parquet format
    - Process log data files from S3 partitioned by year and month to S3 parquet format
     
2. Run `test.ipynb` to check the analytic queries on your Datalake.